Well,
Jerry, you came by the house here to get a little
information about the history of College
Station. To begin with, I might add that my name is
DA Andy Anderson, who at one time was, or I was,
mayor of the city of College Station. Actually, my
work as in the field of city government began in
1957. Actually, I might go back just a little ways,
though, first and mention that I came to this
community in 1939.
At that time, prior to that time, I was located in
Luskin, working for the university at that point.
with the Texas Forest Service. And in January of
this year, I retired from the university after
about 39 years of employment. Prior to that, I was
affiliated with the US Forest Service and was
involved during the acquisition phases of the
National Forest in East Texas. And my work prior to
that was with the old Bureau of Plant Industry in
white pine blister rust control activities. Was
that with the university? No. That was with the
government? No, that was with the federal
government. That was the Bureau of Plant
Industry. It was an old division of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture from Washington, D.C.
Of course, my education, as far as my education is
concerned, I got a bachelor of science degree at
Pennsylvania State University. I subsequently
received a master's degree at Texas A&M. And what
year was that? The master's I got in 19, I think it
was 45.
I believe that was a year. I'm reminiscing here a
little bit now. And I did a little work toward a
doctorate degree, but decided that with the field
activities that I had, I could not do justice to
that degree program. At any rate, my interest in
city government began in the 50s when there was
quite a bit of violation of the deed restrictions
in College Station. And I might add that when I
first came here in 1939,
Bryan and College Station were six miles apart. It
was a two-lane road
with country in between, you might say. Was that
road the old College over here, College Road?
Well, there was a College Road, but also Highway 6.
I see. Highway 6 had gone through. Highway 6 had
gone through. just before I got here, and of course
I came right after the trolley gave up from Bryan to
College Station. And this was a university
community. Everyone, well at that time, most of
the faculty and staff were on campus, or quite a few
of them were on campus, in residences on the
campus. Many, of course, had migrated to the
periphery of the area, the campus per se, And this
house right here, where you're taping this, where
I live, was one of the few that was in this whole area
that we today call College Hills State, or the
College Hills proper.
Where most of the faculty, you said, lived on the
campus. Now, did they move off over to this area as a
group? Most of them, or did they move off at
separate times? Was there a general move off?
Well, there was a general move here, Jerry. They
wanted to, well, they had requested that as fast as
possible, those on the campus move from their
residences. many of these people began to build
their own homes, such as in the South Side and the
East Gate here. So gradually, then, people began
to build their homes and move into them and get off
the campus. About what year was this? Was it 1940?
That was around 1939, 1940.
And gradually the area became built up with a few
more homes going in. And with the building of these
homes, the individuals, the real estate people
that were selling the lots, of course gave us some
restrictions. In other words, the homes were to be
one family dwellings and The sides on both
residences were to be at least a minimum of 10 feet.
Was it kind of like a certain zoning? It was like a
type of zoning. That is right. But then as more
interest, or there was greater interest in terms
of
home building, why those in charge of the railers
and so on selling these lots became a little bit
careless. And as a result, there were a lot of
violations. And these violations led to
criticisms on the part of the public. And I just
happened to be one that they came to. It was my job to
appeal to the council at that time as to these
violations that were going on and appealing to the
city to help us do something about it. Well, how did
you get, why were you sort of the one singled out to
people? Why did people come to you? Well, I guess
maybe I was one that didn't fear to go to the council
and raise cane and see that action was done. And
this ultimately led, of course, to my election
then. to the city council. The people over here in
College Hill said, well, we need a representation
at the council table who will represent us, the
people. And as a consequence, then, I went in in
1957.
And until it was necessary for me to get out in June
of 1971, I almost had, you might say, 14 years of
continuous service to the city. Well, now before
that time, you got into the council. When did
College Station incorporate as a town or city
separately from Bryan? That was in 1938. I see.
Yeah.
What were the reasons that they did that? Were they
afraid that Bryan was going to try to move their
city? No, we were unincorporated at that time,
Jerry. Okay. And this is where a lot of the hard
feelings arose that persist to this day. Even the
student body is unaware of the problems they had
with the city of Bryan, I mean, in the past. But we
were an unincorporated city, you might say, made
up primarily of students, faculty, and staff. In
that day, of course, there were no cars on campus,
as you find today. And it was mainly, it was the
core. Well, just what exactly was the school like?
How large was it at that time? Were there a
lot of buildings that are now on campus still
there? So let's go back to about when they were just
talking about the incorporation of College
Station and the reason why they had to do it,
because Brian was trying to stretch there. Yes.
Well, as I said before the interruption on the
tape, Jerry, we were an unincorporated city.
Bryan was incorporated. And one night, while at a
special council meeting in Bryan, they decided to
extend their boundary outward toward the city of
College Station, or unincorporated city. And as I
said earlier, before the break, much of that area
that is now in Brine, out here at Rosemary, was at
one time a part of our College Station community.
This, of course, created a lot of blood between the
people, the business people, and other people in
Brine and College Station. As a matter of fact,
this bad blood even existed among the student body
a few years later when they banned everything in
the city of Bryan. They had sort of a revolt with the
people down there with the treatment they were
receiving. But at any rate, It became necessary
for us then to meet and take immediate steps to
incorporate our city. Now this was before the days
of zoning, which we now have by legislation. And
they could extend their boundary out as far as they
wanted to. Subsequent to that, then after we
became incorporated, I was on the council. We also
received wind. that they had intended to further
extend their boundary to include the present
airport. So we immediately met... What was this
airport? Is this Easterwood? Easterwood. And we
immediately met then and incorporated all the
lands of Texas A&M University within the
jurisdiction of our boundary so that today All of
the area encompassed within the city is
represented by university lands. I see. Now,
today we have the protection of zoning in terms of
extraterritorial rights and extending out.
Brine can't exceed us in extending their
territory. We can only go one mile as a city. But be
that as it may, we have stabilized our boundary
with brine. Unfortunately, part of what is brine
should have been part of College Station had the
ordinances existing today been in vogue at that
time. Now, you said the lands incorporated by the
university lands, owned lands, were
incorporated into the College Station City area?
That's right. As part of the city. Now, does that
include the lands going out toward the Brazos
where the extension formed? No, no. That just
includes these lands here in town? Yeah, in the
immediate area. That's right. And Easterwood.
And Easterwood, yeah. And we did that, of course,
for our own protection because the city of Bryan at
that time could just keep on going. surround us and
of course we wanted in defense we had to prepare a
buffer and the community as a whole and the student
body all was behind us in our record because of the
feeling that existed at that time. Well in talking
about the student body I was just curious to how
much effect or pressure did they have really on the
College Station City Councilman or the
government in helping them or... Well, it was more
in terms of attitude, Jerry, as to what we were
doing. The people of Bryan at one time, some of
these students say, were gouging them. They
welcomed them to get what they could out of them.
But beyond that, they just didn't want to have
anything to do with it. And this created hard
feelings on the part of the student body. And...
Well, at the time of College Station becoming
incorporated, the students at the university,
were they, I guess they were for the incorporation
of the city at this time? Well, I would dare say they
were. Now, all of the faculty and staff were. And
the student body was to the extent that they didn't
have much feeling for Brian. Of course, you can go
back. In that early period, though, of course,
A&M, for example, had various facilities on
campus for students and faculty and staff. For
example, we had a hardware store over just across
from where the President Exchange Store is. And we
could go in there and get anything. We bought our
milk and butter. in our fruit and everything from
the old F&B. I recall paying $0.09 to $0.10 for a
quart of milk. It was unpasteurized, but it was
high quality milk. And of course, here again, the
folks in Brine resented us getting anything of
this nature from the university. Well, what's the
old F&B? What was that? Well, let's see. I forgot
what F&B was. That's just what everybody called
it. Well, it was a name to it. It was across the
track, and it was a dairy. Well, now, was that
university-owned also? Yes. And all the stores,
they liked to buy a few groceries of that sort. They
were all located either on campus or... Well, most
of them were off campus. Off campus. Like, I recall
Luke Patronella had a grocery store at the East
Gate, and he was a well-respected man in the
community, and... Every year had Easter egg hunts
for all the kids in the community. Well, now, what
about over at Northgate now? Was that an area the
same as it is now? Has it always been sort of...
Somewhat similar to what it is now. That is right.
There were just a few businesses up and down the
drag there. Now, of course, you have more today
than you did at that time. But essentially, it
remained... the same. I mean, there was a grocery
store and a few photographic shops, things of this
nature. Well, was Lupo there at that time or not?
Lupo has been around, yeah. He was there. He wasn't
in that location. He was further east on
University Drive. But Lupo was there when I can
remember him very fondly. Well, how far now to the
south did the College Station city boundaries go
when y'all incorporated, to say toward Navasota
that way? Well, Jerry, they didn't go very far
south out of the city at that time. As a matter of
fact, they didn't go very much beyond the south
gate, just a peripheral area where the people were
building. So there wasn't any buildings going on
then over that part of the... No, no. At that time.
This came subsequent to this with the growth in the
university. You know, right down here we used to
have, at the Eastgate, we used to have the old... I
know the old-time Aggies will remember the blue
tops. These were a series of cottages that were
down there. Any visitors to College Station...
you know, the parents and so on would stay in these
old blue top courts down there. And they have long
since disappeared and their place taken by the lot
down there and everything else. Well, around 1940
or so, 1939, how large was the university at that
time, the student body? It was around 5,000, I
believe. I reckon it would be there. During the
war, what kind of effect did, say, the war have on
the growth and the economy of this area? Do you
remember? Yes.
It had an effect. Of course, the student body, of
course, we had Brian Field come in. That helped
very much the economy of the area. And actually
that was the first base also after they left for
transportation by plane into the Bryan and
College Station area. But the student body
increased some because of the war effort. Of
course it had other, I don't think the, in terms of
growth in the community, I don't think there was
much much effect at all, right? No, except for
homes of those out in Bryan Field, and most of them
lived in Bryan. Some lived in this area. I know
during that period, I was on two assignments for
the Army and Navy. One had to do, as a university
employee, I was charged to look for Waiuli in the
Trans-Pecos region. They were running short of
rubber. And the Waiuli, of course, produces
natural rubber. And I spent three months on that
assignment. And following that, then the Navy put
me out on a special assignment, confidential in
nature. They were running short of hemp rope. And I
had to go out to check the Trans-Pacific or the
western part of the state in terms of yucca to see
how much rope could be made from the yucca if it were
utilized. Of course, this took me all down into old
Mexico, and I went down through that country. I've
been all through that. I know that country pretty
intimately, or at least I did. I was down there on at
least two assignments during the war. Of course,
they were short, but very interesting trips.
Well, who was the mayor of College Station when it
first became corporate? When was their mayor?
Let's see. Frank Anderson was the mayor. He was
then succeeded by Ernest Lankford, who served
most of the time as mayor. Well, he served up until
the time that I took over in 1957. And I served six
years as councilman under him before I ran for
mayor. And at the time, I was petitioned by a large
number of citizens to run, and I did. And I served
almost six years until the suit was brought
against me. And I know it was primarily against me
an individual at the East Gate whom we all know as AP
Boyette. He and some other individuals filed suit
against the city of College Station. Well, not the
city. Well, yes, it included the city, but
primarily included us as individuals, saying
that even though we did not receive any salary, no
remuneration whatever, that it was illegal for us
to serve as an officer of the city while we were a
member of the university. And of course, this went
to court. It went to several courts, as a matter of
fact. And then finally, it was decided in one
district court that that was the law of the land. It
was subsequently taken to a three manned judge
panel in Houston. But before they could act, the
Supreme Court turned that action down. That
necessitated then the development of an
amendment to the state constitution that would
allow us to continue to serve. And I took the
leadership in this. It was called Amendment 12.
And all my correspondence, legal papers, things
of this nature, now repose in the library,
permanent part of the library, so that in the
future, The history of this can be eternal. Well,
at what time now was this action going on? You said
you served six years as mayor starting in 1957?
Well, starting in 57, I served six years on the city
council. I see. And then I decided to get out, and
when I did get out, they asked me to go back and serve
on planning and zoning. And then following my
tenure on that, they decided that the best thing to
do was run for mayor. And then I ran for mayor after
that and was mayor from 66 through June 28 in 1971.
When, following the holding up of four paychecks,
it was decided that principal had gone far enough.
I just couldn't live without the salary. Right. I
see. But I am very pleased with the... period of my
tenure and those on the council. We had an
excellent council at the time of my retirement and
even before that. Of course we had a lot of problems
when I first went on the city council because it was
dominated by AP Boyette primarily and his group.
They were in the majority and I was trying to get
development in the city. in cooperation with the
university.
What we see today is a result of action that we had
earlier taken. But we had a council jury made up,
for example, of the system dean of engineering. We
had one from sociology department. We had one from
planning department. We had a cross-section of
individuals on the council that was really
working on behalf of the city. And what we were
doing, of course, was in favor of the university in
the sense that we had a coordinated approach in
terms of development. Well, what kind of
development was the council, when you were on it or
when you were mayor at the time, trying to go
toward? What were they looking for? Well, when I
went in as mayor, We had a few streetlights in the
city of College Station. What now is Jersey Street
was just Tar Bay Street for two vehicles. We did not
have what we now know as University Drive. There
were no, well the city had been small. Our staff was
small. We needed to expand the staff. We needed to
improve the services in terms of fire codes,
building codes. We had no fire station. The
university provided the firefighting for the
city of College Station.
Our water, of course, came primarily at first from
the university. and then subsequently from
Brine. We have tie-ins, of course, with the
university. But in that period, it was one, or had
to be one, of growth. And the extension of the
Highway 6 towards the south was undertaken even
before the council on which I served went on. We had
University, or I mean Jersey Drive, I was
criticized to some extent for, at that time, well,
they figured, well, we only needed two slabs, you
know, for two cars. But it appears now that our
foresight was justified when you consider the
traffic that is over there. That's true. And the
same thing was said with University Drive,
extending it out to the Interpass. We did fight
very hard to get the east bypass. I was going to ask
about that. I was wondering when did that come
into, when did that idea pop up? Was that organized
mostly by the state then? Is that a state highway?
No, that was Brazos Area Planning Corporation, on
which I served as member. And we had a plan
developed for Bryan and College Station way back
in, That was about 49,
as I recall. And this was the guiding light for the
two cities in terms of plans. And that was the first
time that the possibility of a bypass came up,
looking toward the future. Now, in that period
even, Highway 6 did not have the travel, you know,
traffic that it does today. But we as a council, of
course, pushed this, recognizing the need down
the road. And I think we have been justified in our
vision to this extent. And of course, we were beset
with problems. We were a city on a pay-as-you-go
basis. I think we had one of the best road
construction programs. We had no pay streets in
the city of College Station. And we decided to set
aside a certain amount of money annually for curb
and gutter pavement. And that was set up on a ratio
whereby people could petition and get streets in.
But we did not do any more in a given year than our
finances permitted. And this way, we just kept
growing year after year. That is, in the old part of
the city, in order to do this. And then, of course,
we went ahead with our street light program, at
least on major intersections. And these green,
well, years ago, we started out with little corner
stops with a street name written on them. You've
seen some still in parts of the city. And if you
drive around in the daytime or at night, you do not
know what the name of the street is. So we have these
green signs prepared for street designations.
Now, we had our park areas. We had one like up here in
College Hill that sat dormant for years. To this
end, for example, I instituted a planning program
down at our cemetery where we grew trees and out
planted them in the park areas. Many of the trees
that you see today are a result of this particular
action. And I was one that very much believed in
community participation. And toward this end, I
had many committees in the city, even a cemetery
committee, one that would take care of the
cemetery and, you know, see that the rules and
regulations were upheld and highway
improvements. Just any number of city
committees. Well, what kind of regulations and
rules did you have to go along with on the cemetery
committee? What type of things did they have to do?
Well, what we were trying to avoid, Jerry, was the
idea to regulate the size of a monument and even the
planting of trees. Now, I realize that people do
not realize that there are some, at the time at
least, tend to plant trees that are not conducive
to a cemetery create problems in terms of growth,
not only from the top and leaf litter, but from the
extension of roots. And many of the trees in an old
cemetery utilize this area, why the roots are
broken and the trees finally succumb. And we were
trying to maintain a pretty place and regulate the
outplanting of shrubs and flowers and things that
would not fit into the overall scheme. And we
didn't want one to put out a massive stone and
another one would be a small one. Regulations of
this type. I see.
I think we're about out of tape here. I'll switch it
over. All right.